# Local git

## Tip

For all of these lab steps I recommend put the terminal on the left side of your screen and your windows explorer or mac finder on the right side. This way you can see the changes you are making in the terminal reflected in the file system.

## Initialize a git repository

Create a new directory on your computer called `my-first-repo` where you want to store your git repository.

Open up either git bash (windows) or terminal (linux/mac) and navigate to the directory where you want to create a new git repository.

Run the following command to initialize a new git repository:

```bash
git init
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
git init
Initialized empty Git repository in /Users/john/labs/my-first-repo/.git/
```

This will create a new directory called `.git` in the current directory. This directory contains all the information git needs to manage the repository.

To view the git repository, run the following command:

```bash
ls -la
```

This is the linux list command with the `-la` flag. This will show you all the files in the current directory, including hidden files.

```bash
ls -la
total 0
drwxr-xr-x@ 3 john  staff   96 20 May 13:17 .
drwxr-xr-x  7 john  staff  224 20 May 13:15 ..
drwxr-xr-x@ 9 john  staff  288 20 May 13:17 .git
```

## Check the status of the repository

Run the following command to check the status of the repository:

```bash
git status
```

Your terminal should show the following output:

```bash
git status
On branch main

No commits yet

nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to track)
```

This will show you the current status of the repository. It will tell you which files are staged for commit, which files are modified but not staged, and which files are untracked.

## Add files to the staging area

To add files to the staging area, run the following command:

```bash
git add <file>
```

Replace `<file>` with the name of the file you want to add. You can also use `.` to add all files in the current directory.

Create a file in the directory called `README.md`. Put the following text in there:

```markdown
# My first git repository
```

You can do that via your text editor or run the following command:

```bash
echo "# My first git repository" > README.md
```

You can view the file via the terminal:

```bash
cat README.md
```

Let's check the status of the repository:

```bash
git status
```

```bash
git status
On branch main

No commits yet

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	README.md

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

You can see you have an untracked file:

```
Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	README.md
```

Let's add the file to the staging area:

```bash
git add README.md
```

You can check the status again:

```bash
git status
```

```bash
git status
On branch main

No commits yet

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)
	new file:   README.md
```

You can see that the file `README.md` is now staged for commit.

## Commit changes

To commit the changes, run the following command:

```bash
git commit -m "Initial commit"
```

This will commit the changes to the repository with the message "Initial commit".

You should see the following output:

```bash
git commit -m "Initial commit"
[main (root-commit) 688a95d] Initial commit
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
 create mode 100644 README.md
```

This will commit the changes to the repository. You can view the commit history by running the following command:

```bash
git log
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
commit 688a95d7d0ef856d1160858f13c454993d416bff (HEAD -> main)
Author: John Rellis <john@email.com>
Date:   Mon May 20 13:24:12 2024 +0100

    Initial commit
(END)
```

To exit this view, press `q`.

## git show

To view the changes made in a commit, run the following command:

```bash
git show <commit>
```

Replace `<commit>` with the commit hash you want to view.

```bash
git show 688a95d7d0ef856d1160858f13c454993d416bff
```

```bash
commit 688a95d7d0ef856d1160858f13c454993d416bff (HEAD -> main)
Author: John Rellis <john.d.rellis@gmail.com>
Date:   Mon May 20 13:24:12 2024 +0100

    Initial commit

diff --git a/README.md b/README.md
new file mode 100644
index 0000000..206b43c
--- /dev/null
+++ b/README.md
@@ -0,0 +1 @@
+# My first git repository
```

You can also use the shorthand commit hash:

```bash
git show 688a95d
```

Run the following command to view the changes made in the last commit:

```bash
git show HEAD
```

This will show you the changes made in the last commit.

## Exercise

1. Create a new git repository called `my-second-repo`.
2. Initialize the repository.
3. Create a new file called `index.html` with the following content:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>My first webpage</title>
</head>
<body>
    <h1>Hello, world!</h1>
</body>
</html>
```

4. Check the status and then add the file to the staging area.
5. Commit the changes with the message "Add index.html".
6. View the commit history.
7. View the changes made in the last commit.
8. Add another file and add it to the staging area.

Review the lecture notes as these will explain the commands in more detail.